cool hello everyone my name is Jay and
one of the expert teachers of e to
language what we're going to do in this
live class is look at some tricky pie
charts we're gonna look at some tricky
pie charts for academic writing task 1
what I mean by tricky is this imagine if
this is what you saw on test day would
you know what to write would you be able
to write a response that warrants an
IELTS eight or eight point five or even
seven point five or would you get stuck
on that terrible terrible six point five
what we're going to do in this class is
look at these two pie charts usually
what happens in IELTS academic writing
task 1 is you won't get one pie chart
because it's too easy in fact I don't
think I've ever seen a single pie chart
usually it's two pie charts because at
some stage you have to compare data I'm
going to show you how to do that in fact
I'm going to show you a bit of a super
structure for how to write this and what
I want to do in this lesson even if
you're watching this on YouTube after
the fact get out a pen and a piece of
paper and let's write this thing
sentence by sentence because it's only
when you have actually written one that
it sticks in your brain then you can go
in on test day going bang I know what to
do if you just want the theory and you
just want to look and sort of get some
ideas that's fine but really doing is
learning there you go I don't know what
that means let's take a closer look at
the graph description because on test
day above the pie charts will be this
box of text it says the pie charts below
show how the city of hereford shear
funds its public libraries in two
financial terms summarize the
information by selecting and reporting
the main features and make comparisons
where relevant in other words let's read
it again the pie charts below show how
the city of Hereford sheer funds its
public libraries in two financial terms
so one of the pie charts will be one
financial terms term and the other will
be the other financial term cool let's
look at this closely
this says summarize the information
select and report the main features make
comparisons where relevant this is in
fact what you have to do to achieve a
high IELTS writing score you have to
make sure that you do these three things
here this is where the superstructure
comes into it because what we
effectively want to do is this we want
to summarize we want to describe and we
want to compare what I mean by that is
this this is what your response your
writing should look like on test day of
course you won't have you won't have any
of this written here but this thing here
is what you should write on your paper
with these gaps in between here you have
the summary here you have the
description and here you have the the
comparison where it starts to get
complex I'm gonna walk you through how
to write each part we're going to do it
sentence by sentence first we'll
summarize that's pretty easy that's this
part here all you need to do to
summarize is rewrite that first sentence
the description in your own words to say
the exact same things the exact same
thing rather so we're going to use
paraphrase we're gonna use synonyms
we're going to rewrite this sentence in
our own words and this is how I did it I
broke it down into its constituent parts
so where it says the pie charts below I
wrote the given pie charts where it says
sure I wrote illustrate where it says
how the city of Hereford share I wrote
how the city of Hereford share why
because sometimes there isn't another
way to write it in - you have to make
sure that you say the exact same thing
so sometimes there won't be a synonym
sometimes there won't be a paraphrase
to do it sometimes you have to steal the
phrase directly from that description
cool what about the next one
funded it's public libraries becomes
provided funding for its public
libraries so I've used the same words
but I've just changed it a little bit
and finally over to financial terms I
wrote in the 2014 and 15 and 2017-18
periods like that now it's your turn
because all I did was convert that into
my sentence that says the exact same
thing please
rewrite the task in your own words you
have two minutes
that's one minute it's gonna check the
chat because some of you are pretty fast
yes here we go the pie charts compare
the funds given to the public libraries
of Hereford shear City in 2014 2015 and
2016 2017 really good really good you
did it differently I do it a bit of a
safe way where I just basically rewrite
it phrase by phrase but what you've done
is actually restructured the whole thing
and written it differently but it's good
because it has actually captured the
exact same meanings so that very clever
well done the given pie charts represent
how the city of Hereford she has spent
the revenue hanging on does is it about
spending revenue
it's about funding which is different to
spending so you would lose points there
because it's not about spending revenue
it's about creating revenue or funding
funding is the key word that's probably
a word that you can't find a synonym for
or what's a synonym for funding I don't
know if you please feel free to write
one into the chat below into the
comments the pie charts represent the
expenses again no it's not expenses its
funding its funding that's something
different the given pie charts represent
how the city of Hereford she have funded
its public libraries over two terms well
done that was simple keep it simple the
simplest way to do it is to break it
down piece by piece and then rewrite it
and make sure words like funding are
different from spending okay so that's a
critical thing to remember cool let's
move on to the next step which is to
describe the data okay what I mean here
is we want to describe the main trends
in this section we don't want to use any
data no percentages you can use year
that's fine but we don't want to use any
of the numbers because that comes in the
next section where we compare that's the
tricky part this part really what you're
doing on test day what you need to
remember is to describe the main trend
so I'm gonna read your mind mine says
this overall funding remained relatively
similar over the period stemming from
the five same sources council tax
accounted for the majority of the funds
followed by other government grants
revenue support grants business rates
and other forms of income also
contributed to the funding see how he is
the word funding funding funding there's
no synonym for it cool let me show you
how I did that so first of all I wrote a
sentence about overall what I did was I
just stood back looked at these two
graphs let's have a look at them let's
break this down because we need to
understand what we're looking at let's
look at council tax this is the green
one
so it was 57% and 68% and of the entire
thing well it takes up a majority it's
more than 50% so I said something like
that let me escape that no it's gonna
die don't die come back come back come
back
cool what else have we got let's look at
the next one which is revenue support
grant and went from 18 to 6 so there was
a decrease there fine what about the
this one here in business rates well I
went from 6 to 5 a small decrease what
about from other government grants well
this went from 17 to 19 it's a small
increase and then what about this one
other income went from 2 to 2 well it in
fact it remains stable so really what's
happened here well they've remained
pretty similar there aren't many big
differences and the other way to look at
this is you should see this total income
here 820 million pounds eight hundred
and sixteen point nine million pounds so
let's
go back to my sentence yeah I said
overall the funding remained relatively
similar over the period stemming from
the five same sources okay
please write your overall sentence I
don't want you to say anything in
particular nothing specific just compare
those two graphs and where the where the
funds came from okay one sentence just
write one sentence we're gonna do this
sentence by sentence you have one minute
you
all right let me have a look at your
sentences in general good yeah funding
remained the same in both terms did it
remain the same
not quite it remained almost the same or
very similar there were some differences
you can't say it remain the same that
would be incorrect
to do it is obvious that the vast
majority of money funding comes from the
council tax no we're not getting into
comparing things or anything like that
we're just giving a general description
of what we're looking at a very bird's
eye stand back
look at those two pie charts and say you
know what they're pretty similar and
funding has come from the same five
sources that's it very basic this first
sentence is just really general overall
it can be seen that the funds given by
the council tax is slightly increased
over time good but I don't think that's
true because it actually went down fine
overall there was no significant
differences in funding over the to
financial periods periods from five
different sources that is a good
sentence that is a good sentence cool
let's keep going because we're going to
move on to the next one I wrote overall
funding remained relatively similar over
the period stemming from the five same
sources you can see that now we want to
do this one we want to describe the
council tax and the other government
grants why does anyone know why why did
I put these two together just type into
the chat
why am i going to combine these two into
one sentence this is the hundred dollar
question the answer this let's make it a
hundred million dollars one hundred
million dollars any ideas any ideas yes
go they both increased they were the
only two that increased in funding okay
that's why I've put them together so
have a look at my sentence here I've
said council tax accounted for the
majority of the funds followed by other
government grants right I've put them
together yes that's fine let's go back
with it mine's a little bit different
fine please write one sentence that
doesn't compare
but describes both the council tax and
the other government grants please you
have one minute to write one sentence
that describes these two funding sources
you
okay let's have a look at the check here
council tax and other government grants
were the majority sources and had eaten
had an and know had increase just an
increased over the time periods good yes
nice and simple very clear general
trends what are they
you've chosen two pieces of the pie that
both showed increases you've put them
together in a sentence and you said you
know what these two things increased
over the time period they they also
accounted for the vast majority and they
increased we're keeping in this
paragraph a very general view of the
trends in the next paragraph are going
to specifics okay council tax increased
its funds as well as other government
grants good fine you can make it a
little bit more complex but that's good
well done cool all right so I said the
council tax accounted for the majority
of the funds followed by other
government grants and I could have also
said that and they both increased over
the periods fine now I grouped these
ones together why did I group these ones
together because they all decreased this
one went from 18 to six this one went
from six to five whoops this one stayed
relatively similar why did I put that
one there
anyway there you go I screwed up there
but let's read this mine says revenue
support grants business rates and other
forms of income also contributed to the
funding ah fine I didn't mention
anything about decreasing but I think
you probably could I think you could say
something like revenue support grant and
business rates decreased over the period
while other income remained the same or
something like that so please describe
you can do these two or in a third
sentence here or something like that see
how you
all right let's have a look at some of
your sentences okay
in contrast good here we go revenue
support grants and business rates
decreased in the following financial
year while other income remained
unchanged good so you've just described
the main trends there you haven't used
any data and you've done that accurately
by saying that two of them decreased one
of them remains stable good revenue
support grounds and business rates
decreased in the second term in 2017 18
good revenue support grants business
rates and other income shows a
decreasing trend be careful here because
other income didn't in fact decrease it
remained the same at 2 percent and 2
percent so you have to keep that
separate and perhaps write another
sentence or another clause while other
income remained the same over the period
excellent so what have we done well
we've just described in general terms
those trends or the general increases
the decreases and the one that remains
stable we didn't use any specific data
from the from the pie charts that's next
this is where it starts to get a little
bit tricky this is where we have to
compare percentages ok so what we do is
we choose 2 pie pieces we compare them
and we include the percentage
information this links back to right at
the beginning in the task description
that said that you needed to select and
compare relevant information now it's up
to us which two pie pieces we choose but
it's actually quite simple with pie
charts with line graphs it's much more
difficult but with pie charts it's
pretty simple
because what we're going to do is we're
going to compare this with this
we're not going to compare this with
this for example because it's not a
relevant comparison we just want to
compare what happened to cancel taxes in
this period compared to this period then
what we'll do we might because this is
also the increasing one we might compare
this piece to this piece next then we'll
compare this one to this one what
happened there specifically and we're
going to use percentages what happened
here there was a slight decrease by 1%
and what happened here with other income
will in fact it remained the same at 2%
so let's have a look I'm just gonna read
your mind so you get an idea of what it
means to include data to include
percentages and numbers I said
comparatively the total funds collected
over the two periods were very similar
falling from 820 million pounds in the
2014-15 period to 816 point nine million
pounds in the 2017-18 period with a mere
3.1 million pound difference
more specifically council tax increase
from the first period to the second
period by exactly 11 percent following a
similar trajectory other government
grants also increased over the two
periods by two percent contrary to the
growth seen in council tax and
government grants revenue support grants
decrease quite significantly from 18
percent to 6 percent while business
rates decreased by a single percent
other income sources remained steady at
2 percent over the two periods so I
forgot to tell you something here I
actually my first sentence compared this
with this the total income or the total
funds collected okay so that's what I
first started with then I moved into
well this one for me seemed like the
most logical comparison to make I
compared these two
then I compared these two and then these
two here and then the red ones and then
finally I in my last sentence I compared
other income so let's do this step by
step I want you to compare the total
income over the two period so one
sentence compare these two numbers
please
all right what have you got what have
you got what have you got
cool revenue - did you do all right
let's go back please compare these two
total income just one sentence that's
all I want
all right here we go the total income
decreased slightly good nice precise I
believe it did decrease slightly not
that much it depends it what you think
of 4 million pounds but anyway decreased
slightly from 820 million pounds in
2014-15 financial year to 816 million in
the 2015 to 16 financial year your years
aren't quite precise and make sure you
use the precise data because if we look
closely yes it did crease from 820
exactly but it remember this point 9
there so a decrease from here to here
one sentence that's a good way to open
up fine so I wrote this comparatively
the total funds collected over the two
periods were very similar falling from
820 million pounds in the 2014-15 period
to 816 point nine million pounds in the
2017-18 period with a mere 3.1 million
pound difference cool now I want you to
compare council tax please they're the
two green pieces one sentence what
happened over the two time periods
all right let's have a look at this one
here okay so we're looking at 57% to 68
percent over the two periods so there
was growth okay fine it is also evident
that the funds given by the cancelled
tax has increased at approximately ten
percent over the period good council tax
being the majority source of funding in
both the financial years showed a
further increase of 11% in followed in
the in the in the second financial year
okay in the second time period in the
second term beautiful well done that's
good well done well done well done so
you've compared these two here excellent
basically what did I write I wrote this
I said more specifically council tax
increased from the first period to the
second period by exactly 11 percent okay
so I did a little bit of mathematics
where I I subtracted 57 from 68 you
don't have to be good at maths this is
pretty simple stuff it does help a
little bit if you can do that or you can
just say it decreased from 68% to 57%
cool let's do the next one which I think
is the most logical because it's also an
increase so we want to put our increases
together this is the other government
grants from 17 to 19 percent please
write one sentence
cool let's have a look here other
government grants also increase what are
we doing other government grants yes
here we go right other government grants
remained similar with tiny growth of 2%
ok tiny is not a word that we would use
in informal academic language we've
small is better small growth or
insignificant growth
insignificant is a nice word to use
they're insignificant growth of just 2%
similarly there was an increase of 2
percent in the revenue support grant as
well fine that's good similarly there
was an increase good similarly so you've
connected your previous sentence to this
sentence excellent this a similar trend
can be seen in other government grants
which increased from 17 percent in 2014
15 to 19 percent in 2017 18 good other
government grants also increased over
the period by just 2 percent similarly
there was an increase of 2 percent in
other government grants as well
beautiful so as I said following a
similar trajectory other government
grants also increased over the two
periods by 2 percent so mine's pretty
similar to yours now let's do what have
I done here what have I done
ok I've combined both of these so I'm
still compared I'm still looking at
revenue support so I'm gonna compare
this one to this one here ok but I'm
also in the same sentence going to
compare these two so I'm comparing blue
with blue and red with red I'm not going
to compare blue with red or red with
blue but what I'm going to do is I'm
going to write a bit of a complex
sentence and the reason I will do this
is because the examiners will like it
please have a look here I said contrary
to the growth scene in council tax and
government grants , revenue support
grants decrease quite significantly from
18 percent to 6 percent while business
rates decrease by a single percent
so I've actually done three things here
let's have a look at what I've done
because it's kind of clever and this is
what you need to do so first of all I've
linked I've linked my new sentence to
the previous information and I said
contrary to the growth contrary to the
growth in council tax and government
grants here's my beginning of the
sentence revenue support current grants
decrease quite significantly from 18 to
6 and here I've included the D the other
source of the other two things that have
decreased or the the business rates
rather while business rates decreased by
a single percent so see if you can do
that as well let's go back see if you
can write a complex sentence where you
can where you compare these two and if
you can connect it to your previous
sentence
all right let's have a look at some of
these sentences I need to get rid of
that cool all right here we go
so revenues support grants significantly
dropped by two-thirds also business
rates slightly dropped by one percent
good okay good that's fine it'd be nice
to connect this because we've talked
about the growth now we're talking about
the decreases so it'd be nice to it sort
of jumps we don't want it to jump so we
want to make a connection back so in
contrast to the growth comma then we can
talk about the decreases need to think
about how you connect sentences within
the paragraph okay that's also really
important for your coherence mark in
contrast good good good good
revenue support and business rates
decreased over the period with revenue
support grants falling by 12% as well as
business rates falling by a marginal 1%
excellent well done very good there
in contrast good so you've connected you
haven't you're not jumping you've made a
logical connection between the growth
and now we're talking about the
decreases in contrast a substantial
decline of 12% was seen on revenue
support and 1% decrease on business
rates as well you've also written
passive as passive sentence there which
is which is excellent so we want to
combine a few passive sentences in if we
can if it makes sense was seen a
decrease was seen okay so that's a good
passive sentence conversely that's a
nice way to link the two sentences
conversely comma revenue support grants
declined markedly from 18% to 6% comma
while business rates showed a fall bar
of only 1% at the same time good that's
looking really really nice so just to
remind you of what I wrote
I said contrary to the growth scene in
council tax and government grants comma
revenue support grants decreased quite
significantly from 18 percent to 6
percent our business rates
creased by a single percent now I've
left one sentence at the end to describe
other income please describe this in one
sentence compare the two time periods in
one sentence
let's have a look other income remain
the same remained passed into the same
despite changes in other income
resources however other income remained
unchanged over the period good this is
the type of sentence you want to write
it's pretty straightforward use a nice
connector like however or or despite the
other changes other income remained
unchanged good good good good good
cool well done so I wrote other income
sources remained steady at 2% over the
two periods fine recap before I recap I
just want to look at this I want to look
at this and I want to think about well
we know the structure we summarized we
described main trends we compared fine
but let's just have a look at some of
the grammar in here so I just want to
look at these verbs illustrate provided
past tense funding remained past tense
council tax accounted for past tense
revenue support contributed to past
tense the total funds collected past
tense were very similar bla bla bla bla
bla
more specifically council tax increased
past tense now this was a bit of a
tricky one because let's go back and
look at this graph I've used past tense
2014-15 fine that's the reason why
2017-18 well this is where you have to
make a decision because okay they're
allocating some future funding so I
should say something like business rates
it will increase and use future tense
but I've just decided not to is it less
precise well not really because I don't
really understand well we're talking
about two funding periods one that's
distinctly in the past
that's in the present past and future
just to make my life simpler and I
believe this would still be precise
because the funding would could have
been missed this is where verb tenses in
English starts to get crazy because when
was the funding collected maybe it was
collected last month in which case I can
use past tense
in other words it doesn't really say but
let's just imagine let's just imagine
that these two pie charts
this one was 2014-15 let's imagine this
was 2000 and and 19 for argument's sake
and 2020 now I'm going to have to think
about my verb tenses more critically and
think about how funding was 18 percent
for revenue Support Programme this is
predicted to be or will increase or
sorry decrease will decrease to 6
percent so I could say here for if I
think about again use this use these
numbers as the guide to your verb tenses
so I could say here business rates were
past tense 6 percent in this period
they're predicted to they will in sorry
decrease by 1 percent
they will decrease then I'll use a
future tense verb so when you're doing
this thinking about the x-axis will
dictate which of verb tense you use ok
because it's gonna be in the past or
it's going to be in the future it's
gonna be hard to write 1 in the present
but that's the sort of idea that I am
giving you there let's just recap so
three things we need to summarize the
two pies and we do that from the task
description we just simply rewrite that
task description then we describe the
main trends of the pies we say this one
increased this one was the majority and
it increased this one increased quite
significantly these three decreased and
one of them's
the same fine then third thing we do is
we compare the pieces that's where we
get into the data we say this one
increased by 17%
this one decreased from 6% to 2%
whatever it is that's where we get
detailed okay so overall what you want
your writing task want to look like is
this this one I did a word count
it's a rare I think from memory its 173
words so as long as you get more than
150 words that's fine cool and that is
that by the way if you're on YouTube
you're watching this please click like
click Subscribe and leave a nice comment
I appreciate nice comments there they
make me feel good also do check out the
website if you need some help with your
IELTS writing because we're experts and
we give feedback and we give tutorials
and we've got good methods lessons etc
etc right now though I'm gonna go to Q&A
for the e2 members should we use words
like apparently or predominantly it just
totally depends on what you're trying to
say you by all means you can use those
words but you should only use those
words if they're precise if they're
saying the right thing okay don't just
use words that sound good
because if they impress imprecise you
will lose points any other questions for
me any other questions for me cool
that's fine let me go check out YouTube
questions let me check out the YouTube
questions let me have a look let me have
a look so I have a problem when I write
it's tough it's tough I feel for you I
feel for you feedback critical feedback
on your writing is the best thing that
you can do to improve it have an expert
look at your writing and tell you what
you're doing wrong only when you know
what you're doing wrong can you improve
because
the most difficult thing is that you
just don't know what your problems are
right any more questions
not there not there cool I might wrap it
up if you have any questions feel free
to put them into the comments below and
I will get to you eventually thank you
very much for coming along I hope it was
helpful do check out the website I'll
see you soon
you